ANNEXE ÉPISODE 19 (appendix episode 19 in English)

To understand Ahaz’s reign, we must first look to King 
Menahem of Israel. Menahem was a usurper with no rightful 
claim to Israel’s throne, but he took it from Shallum, who 
likewise had no rightful claim (2 Kings 15:8-16). Menahem 
sent tribute to Assyria, the ancient Near East’s major power 
at the time, “to confirm his hold on the royal power.” In 
other words, Menahem pledged that Israel, a weaker player in 
geopolitics, would support Assyria politically and send 
tribute regularly in exchange for Assyria’s support of 
Menahem’s reign and protection of Israel.

Some years later, Pekah became king of Israel during the 
reign of Azariah (Uzziah). Maybe tired of Israel’s sending its 
wealth to Assyria every year, Pekah rebelled against 
Assyria. He formed an alliance with King Rezin of Syria 
against Assyria. Perhaps when King Ahaz of Judah refused to join 
them, they invaded Judah in order to dethrone the dynasty of 
David, and set up a puppet king (the son of 
Tabeal) that would make Judah join the alliance against 
Assyria. This attack is described in 2 Kings 16:5–6 as well 
as in Isaiah 7:1–2. 

From Chronicles we learn that, before the siege, Ahaz was 
twice defeated with great loss, once by the Syrians (2 
Chronicles 28:5), and once by the Israelites (2 Chronicles 
28:6). He was probably, therefore, reduced to great straits 
at the time when Isaiah received directions to seek an 
interview with him, and communicate to him a comforting 
message from God. The message was to trust God to destroy 
Syria and Israel and to ask for a sign to confirm this 
promise (Isa. 7:3–11). Ahaz refused, saying that the refusal 
was motivated by faith when it was probably because Ahaz 
intended to make an alliance with Assyria against Syria and 
Israel. So, Ahaz entered into an arrangement with Assyria 
similar to the one Israel had made earlier with Assyria (v. 
12; see 2 Kings 16:7–9). Isaiah foresaw that this would be 
devastating for Judah. This foreign entanglement meant that 
Assyria would eventually invade Judah and cause great 
destruction (Isa. 7:13–8:10).

The two passages below concern two different events and show 
the general attitude of Ahaz with regards to foreign gods 
and alliances. Despite sending gift to Assyria, Assyria did 
attack Judah later.

> 2Ch 28:23 He offered sacrifices to the 
> gods of Damascus who had defeated him, 
> for he said, "These gods helped the 
> kings of Aram, so they will help me, 
> too, if I sacrifice to them." But 
> instead, they led to his ruin and the 
> ruin of all Israel.

> 2KI 16:8-10 And Ahaz took the silver 
> and gold found in the temple of the 
> Lord and in the treasuries of the 
> royal palace and sent it as a gift to 
> the king of Assyria. The king of 
> Assyria complied by attacking Damascus 
> and capturing it. He deported its 
> inhabitants to Kir and put Rezin to 
> death.  Then King Ahaz went to 
> Damascus to meet Tiglath-Pileser king 
> of Assyria. He saw an altar in 
> Damascus and sent to Uriah the priest 
> a sketch of the altar, with detailed 
> plans for its construction. 
